T o Thread or Not to Thread: The Impact of
Conversation Threading on Online Discussion
Pablo Aragón,*† Vicenç Gómez* Andreas Kaltenbrunner*†
*Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
†Eurecat, Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
Online discussion is essential for the communication and col-
laboration of online communities. The reciprocal exchange
of messages between users that characterizes online discus-
sion can be represented in many diﬀerent ways. While some
platforms display messages chronologically using a simple
linear interface, others use a hierarchical (threaded) interface
to represent more explicitly the structure of the discussion.
Although the type of representation has been shown to aﬀect
communication, to the best of our knowledge, the impact of
using either one or the other has not yet been investigated in
a large and mature online community.
In this work we analyze Menéame, a popular Spanish social
news platform which recently transitioned from a linear to
a hierarchical interface, becoming an ideal research oppor-
tunity for this purpose. Using interrupted time series analy-
sis and regression discontinuity design, we observe an abrupt
and signiﬁcant increase in social reciprocity after the adop-
tion of a threaded interface. We furthermore extend state-of-
the-art generative models of discussion threads by including
reciprocity, a fundamental feature to explain better the struc-
ture of the discussions, both before and after the change in the
interface.
Introduction
The interaction between users in social media platforms has
enabled the emergence of online communities. In these com-
munities, online discussion is essential for the communica-
tion and collaboration. Since they are commonly built by
strangers, trust between users is only possible when reci-
procity occurs (Seabright 2010), for example in the form
of a strong exchange of messages between users. Such
reciprocity has been traditionally seen as a sign of an in-
ward focus and vigorous debate (Fisher, Smith, and Welser
2006) and some theories have also suggested a relation-
ship between reciprocity and captivating/engaging commu-
nication (Rafaeli and Sudweeks 1997). Furthermore, reci-
procity is a necessary condition for deliberative purposes
because it allows to gain knowledge of the perspectives
of others (Habermas 1985). Thus, many approaches to
measure deliberation include reciprocity (Schneider 1997;
Copyright c⃝2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Jensen 2003; Graham and Witschge 2003) in order to quan-
tify the degree to which a conversation is a real discus-
sion (Janssen and Kies 2005).
Although online discussions are simply characterized by
an exchange of messages, there are many ways in which a
discussion can be presented to a user. Discussion threads are
collections of messages posted as replies to previous mes-
sages. Therefore, many platforms like email clients and on-
line forums have adopted ahierarchical view, also known as
conversation threading, i.e. messages are arranged close to
their replies in a tree-like structure. With this type of view,
reciprocal interactions between users are explicitly shown.
In contrast, some other platforms show messages regardless
of reply relationships with a linear view. The sorting crite-
ria of messages with this view is typically chronological to
indicate how a discussion thread evolves over time.
Previous work has examined the performance of exper-
imental tools with a speciﬁc form of view, either linear
or hierarchical. Results usually indicate some beneﬁts of
using the hierarchical view, favoring knowledge construc-
tion (McV erry 2007) or providing better local context (V eno-
lia and Neustaedter 2003). Conversation threading miti-
gates the so-called co-text loss problem (Fuks, Pimentel,
and De Lucena 2006), i.e. the inability of readers to “iden-
tify which of the previous messages provides the elements
that are necessary to understand the message that is being
read” (Pimentel, Fuks, and de Lucena 2003). Co-text loss
occurs when interactions are presented separately (e.g. with
a linear view) and users are not able to distinguish the ear-
lier message to which a particular message is replying to.
A comparative study of both views in an experimental chat
found that coherence was also improved thanks to the hierar-
chical view but, in contrast, participants reported better user
experience when interacting with the linear view (Smith,
Cadiz, and Burkhalter 2000).
These previous studies are based on small groups of re-
cruited participants instead of an existing community, and
they do not address how reciprocity is aﬀected. Furthermore,
they do not include a modeling approach, thus their theoret-
ical insights about the observed behavioral diﬀerences are
limited. Generative models of discussion threads have been
proposed to explain the structure and growth of online dis-
cussion by means of behavioral features, such as popular-
ity or novelty of messages (Kumar, Mahdian, and McGlo-
Proceedings of the Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2017)
12
(a) Linear
 (b) Hierarchical (conversation threading)
Figure 1: The two types of conversation views in Menéame for an example thread: (a) linear view, before the platform change in
January 2015, (b) hierarchical view, after the change. In both views, every reply to a comment contains the symbol # followed
by the id of the comment it replies to. Blue comments are written by the post’s author.Comments scored negatively are shown
in white without text unless clicked upon.
hon 2010; Wang, Y e, and Huberman 2012; Gómez et al.
2013). They are language-independent approaches and can
thus successfully reproduce many of the structural patterns
observed in online discussions of very diverse nature. How-
ever, despite reciprocity patterns commonly emerge in on-
line discussion networks, the state-of-the-art models do not
incorporate this as a feature. Therefore, it is unclear whether
reciprocity is either a behavioral feature or a resulting eﬀect
of discussion dynamics.
In this work we want to increase our understanding of
the impact of conversation threading on online discussion.
For that, we ﬁrst measure how the speciﬁc type of con-
versation view aﬀects reciprocity, and then how a model-
ing approach can capture the interplay between conversation
view, structure of discussions, and reciprocity. The recipro-
cation of interactions plays a primary role since users are
motivated to contribute to the community expecting useful
help and information in return (Kollock and Smith 2002;
Plickert, Cote, and Wellman 2007; Gray, Ward, and Nor-
ton 2014). Existing theories have established that reciprocity
is a deﬁning attribute of online communities (Wellman
and Gulia 1999) and a behavioral indicator for their emer-
gence (Herring et al. 2004). Its absence leads communities
to fail (Harasim 1993). Given that reciprocity is essential in
online communities and conversation threading makes ex-
plicit reciprocal interactions between users, as opposed to a
linear view, our research questions are:
•RQ1: How does conversation threading a ﬀect the reci-
procity within the discussion of an online community?
•RQ2: Is reciprocity a key behavioral feature when model-
ing the structure and growth of discussion threads?
• RQ3: How does conversation threading aﬀect the behav-
ioral features when modeling the structure and growth of
discussion threads?
Answering these questions represents a methodological
challenge, mainly because of the diﬃculties and limitations
of performing a controlled experiment. We overcome this
challenge using data from Menéame
1, the most popular
Spanish social news networking service (the 2nd most
visited site of this type in Spain after Reddit2). The website
interface changed in January 2015. The original conversa-
tion view presented the comments of a thread linearly in a
chronological order (see Figure 1a). Since that change, the
comments are displayed by default hierarchically following
a tree-structure (see Figure 1b). This platform intervention
occurred in isolation, which allows us to analyze the impact
of such a change with a reduced inﬂuence of possible
confounders that may also aﬀect the community and the
originated discussions. For this reason, Menéame becomes
an ideal opportunity to measure the impact of the two types
of conversation view on a real and large online community.
The organization of the paper is as follows. In the fol-
lowing section we describe the dataset of discussion threads
collected from Menéame. We then present our statistical
analysis to measure the impact of the change of view on
the reciprocity of replies. Next, we follow a modeling ap-
1https://www.meneame.net/
2http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/meneame.net
13
proach and extend state-of-the-art generative models of dis-
cussion threads by incorporating an authorship model and
reciprocity. This extension is critical to reproduce the struc-
ture and evolution of threads accurately and to measure how
the user behavior is aﬀected by the change of view. Finally,
we discuss the implications of our ﬁndings for the design
and research of online discussion platforms.
Dataset
Menéame is the most popular Spanish social news network-
ing service. Social news websites, like Reddit, Slashdot or
Digg, feature user-posted stories which are discussed in
threads, and voted to be ranked based on their popularity
within the community. The selection process of featured sto-
ries is made by an open source collaborative ﬁltering algo-
rithm similar to the one in Reddit. Besides the change of the
conversation view (from linear to hierarchical), some other
reasons make Menéame a platform of interest in our study:
•The community of Menéame consists of thousands of
users who daily debate hundreds of stories (links to news
and blog posts).
•The platform was released in 2005 and therefore
Menéame is a large and mature community of users which
have developed their own culture of practices.
We collected all the stories which were promoted to the
front page between 2011 to 2015 (both years included) and
every comment from the discussion thread of each story. The
reasons for focusing on the promoted stories is because they
are more appealing to the community of Menéame and to
guarantee a suﬃciently large volume of comments per story.
In total, we obtained 72,005 posts and 5,385,324 comments.
For each comment, we kept the associated meta-data such
as the id, the id of the post/comment it is being replied to,
the url, the user name, and the time-stamp. We should re-
mark that, as shown in Figure 1, both the linear and the hi-
erarchical interface display at the beginning of every reply
to a comment contains the symbol # followed by the id of
the comment it replies to. Therefore, discussions threads in
Menéame can always be mapped into a tree, which is im-
plicit in the linear view and becomes explicit when the view
is hierarchical.
Measuring conversation threading eﬀects
In this section we present our statistical analysis and results
on the dataset of Menéame. We ﬁrst describe a preliminary
analysis and then introduce our methodology based on re-
gression discontinuity design (RDD). We then deﬁne how
to characterize mathematically reciprocity and describe our
results.
Preliminary analysis
To better understand the evolution of discussions in
Menéame, we ﬁrst examined the temporal proﬁle of some
global activity indicators of the platform. Results are shown
in Figure 2 with a vertical line indicating the change from a
linear to a hierarchical view in January 2015.
We observe that, although the number of stories in the
front page (Figure 2a) decreases over time, the total number
of comments (Figure 2b) ﬁrst decreases from 2011 to 2014
but then increases from 2014 to 2016. The number of unique
users (Figure 2c) also decreases from 2011 to 2014 but then
remains stable. These trends are coupled with a seasonal pat-
tern with activity drops during summer and winter holidays.
These cyclic patterns are corrected when one normalizes the
binned data by the number of threads. Interestingly, the aver-
age number of comments per thread (Figure 2d) and unique
users per thread (Figure 2e) show a sustained increase with
an apparent abrupt change in the beginning of 2015, i.e.
when the conversation view was modiﬁed from linear to hi-
erarchical.
Impact of conversation threading on reciprocity
To quantify the impact of the change of the conversation
view, we apply regression discontinuity design (RDD). RDD
is a statistical test used in econometrics to estimate treat-
ment eﬀects in a quasi-experimental setting, where treatment
is determined by whether an observed assignment variable
exceeds a known cutoﬀpoint (Thistlethwaite and Campbell
1960; Lee and Lemieux 2010). This technique has been ap-
plied recently in previous studies to measure how the design
and technical features of a given platform constrain, distort,
and shape user behavior on that platform (Hale et al. 2014;
Malik and Pfeﬀer 2016).
In this work, we use RDD to assess statistically the im-
pact of conversation threading, since we only have observa-
tional data in a non-experimental setting. We start from tem-
poral measurements of our variable of interest, in our case,
the reciprocity, which we deﬁne mathematically in the next
paragraph. RDD ﬁts two diﬀerent functions to this tempo-
ral data, before and after the cutoﬀpoint (when conversation
threading was adopted in Menéame) and allows to quantify
the break between both ﬁtted lines at the cutoﬀ. The null hy-
pothesis is that the reciprocity is not aﬀected by the release
of the new conversation view. For further mathematical de-
tails and assumptions of the method, we refer the reader to
the appendix.
To formally characterize reciprocity, we consider the di-
rected network of replies between users in each discussion
thread. In this network, each node correspond to a user and a
directed edge between useru and v exists if useru replied to
user v in the discussion. The weight of that edge is the num-
ber of times u replied to v in that thread. Given a directed
network of N nodes, reciprocity is traditionally deﬁned as
follows:
r =E
↔
E , (1)
where E↔corresponds to the number of bidirectional edges
and E corresponds the total number of edges. This approach
is limited in the sense that it does not consider the relative
diﬀerence of reciprocity in comparison to a random network
with the same number of nodes and edges. The deﬁnition
by Garlaschelli and Loﬀredo (2004) overcomes this problem
14
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
1
2
3
4
10 2
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
10 4
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
1
2
3
4
10 3
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10 2
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
2
4
6
10 1
Figure 2: Number of stories (a), comments (b), unique
users (c), average number of comments per story (d), and
unique users per story (e). The vertical line indicates the
change of the conversation view (from linear to hierarchi-
cal).
and deﬁnes thecorrected reciprocity as
ρ=r −¯a
1 −¯a , (2)
where ¯a is the network density, i. e. the ratio between the
number of existing edges and the total number of possible
edges ¯a =E/(N(N −1)). The previous deﬁnitions of reci-
procity do not take into account the weighted nature of edges
in the reply network, i.e. the number of times that two users
interchange messages within a thread. Squartini et al. (2013)
proposes the following deﬁnition of reciprocity for weighted
networks
r
w =W↔
W =
∑
u
∑
v/nequaluw↔
uv∑
u
∑
v/nequaluwuv
, (3)
where u,v are nodes indexes, wuv is the weight of the edge
from u to v, and w↔
uv
is the minimum weight between the
edge from u to v and the edge fromv to u.
We construct one network of replies between users for
each conversation and compute the three previous reci-
procity indicators in each of these networks. In the follow-
ing, we omit results usingr because they are indistinguish-
able from the results usingρ. This is explained because the
constructed reply networks are very sparse and the density ¯a
is low. We then average these indicators at a time resolution
of one month, which deﬁnes the bin-size in our analysis. The
bin size is an arbitrary choice, we experimented with several
sizes but observed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
We show in Figure 3 how both corrected reciprocity ρ
and weighted reciprocityr
w change over time, together with
the results of the RDD test. We ﬁrst note that both reci-
procity measures show a sustained increasing trend, which
suggests that captivating/engaging communication increases
over time. Furthermore, if reciprocity is a deﬁning attribute
of an online community, as proposed in Wellman and Gu-
lia (1999), the increasing trend can be interpreted as a posi-
tive indicator of the performance of Menéame. The weighted
measure is slightly higher than the non-weighted metric,
which suggests that the frequency of replies between the
same users is important. However, both proﬁles are very
similar, so this frequency is not qualitatively determinant.
We should remark that we use an F-test in every point in
the time series to establish the most signiﬁcant cutoﬀ. Our
analysis identiﬁes January 2015 as the optimal cutoﬀ, which
corresponds exactly with the transition of the interface. This
is indicated in Figure 3 by a black dashed line that separates
the data before (in red) and after (in blue) the cutoﬀ. The
results show a notable impact for the both corrected reci-
procity and weighted reciprocity (see the appendix for the
numerical details of the results). This means that the null hy-
pothesis can be rejected and, therefore, there is a signiﬁcant
eﬀect in reciprocity when Menéame transitioned from a lin-
ear to a hierarchical conversation view. It is also important
to mention that the slope increased after the change, indi-
cating that reciprocity, not only changes abruptly after the
adoption of conversation threading, but also increases at a
higher speed during the period of available data considered.
We will further discuss the impact of these ﬁndings in the
discussion section.
15
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Figure 3: Regression discontinuity design for the metrics of
reciprocity in the discussions (bin size=one month). V erti-
cal line is the cutoﬀobtained through an F-test. Red circles
are points before the cutoﬀ, blue triangles data points after
the cutoﬀ. Solid line is the discontinuous linear regression,
the dashed line is the continuous linear regression of the null
model. The analysis shows that the two reciprocity metrics
present a break and an increase of the slope after the cutoﬀ.
Modeling reciprocal online discussions
We now take a modeling approach to gain understanding of
the interplay between the structure and the evolution of the
discussions, the reciprocity as an abstract feature, and the
type of representation. In the next subsection, we character-
ize informally the discussion threads with special emphasis
on their network structure and disregarding the content of
the messages. We then describe an existing generative model
of online discussions and present our extension which incor-
porates an authorship model and reciprocity. We show that
our proposed extension better explains the observed data. Fi-
nally, we perform RDD within the model features.
Structure and growth of discussion threads
To illustrate the typical structure of discussion threads in
Menéame, we use a thread visualization tool (Aragón,
Gómez, and Kaltenbrunner 2016). Note that these networks
diﬀer from the reply networks analyzed in the previous sec-
tion, since nodes here corresponds to comments, instead of
users.
In Figure 4, we present two popular discussion threads
that took place before and after the platform change. The
ﬁrst one is from 2013 (left) and the second one is from 2015
(right). Node color follows the criteria: black (root of the
thread, i.e the story), gray (ﬁrst level comments) and ran-
dom color (replies to comments). We observe that every re-
ply written by the same user gets an identical random color.
These criteria allow us to observe that both threads share
some similarities, such as long chains of two users that al-
ternate reciprocal interactions (i.e. chains of nodes of two
alternating colors). This ﬁnding is consistent with previous
work on modeling the structure and evolution of discussion
cascades using data from Menéame (Gómez, Kappen, and
Kaltenbrunner 2011). Node size corresponds to the number
of received comments (except for the root) and shows that
replies (colored nodes) in the thread of 2015 often attract
themselves many replies and originate new sub-discussions
within the thread. This eﬀect is not that pronounced in the
2013 thread, in which comments usually belong to chains of
two users and rarely trigger a discussion cascade. In sum-
mary, we observe that the thread from 2013 is closer to a
star-like structure (i.e. contains many more direct comments
to the original post) while the thread from 2015 is more com-
plex with higher branching probability at deep levels of the
discussion.
A generative model of discussion threads
To measure the impact of using a hierarchical view in the
evolution of the discussion threads, we build on the model
introduced in Gómez et al. (2013), which has proven to
be successful in capturing the structural properties and the
temporal evolution of discussion threads present in very di-
verse platforms, e.g. Slashdot, Barrapunto, Wikipedia and
the same Menéame (before conversation threading was
adopted). It is a parametrized mathematical model that gen-
erates growing trees in discrete time. At each time-step, a
new comment (node) arrives to the thread and each of the
following structural features is considered for each node in
the discussion:
• The popularity or number of replies. A node will at-
tract replies proportionally with factor αto the number
of replies received so far.
• The novelty or the elapsed time since it was written. Re-
cent comments will tend to be more replied than old com-
ments. Novelty decays exponentially with parameterτ.
• The root-bias or tendency to write more comments to the
root node. This diﬀerentiates between the original post
(root node), which attracts replies with factor β, and or-
dinary comments (non-root nodes).
Formally, the discussion thread at time-step t is repre-
sented as a vector of parent nodes π
1:t = (π1,π2 ...,π t ),
where πt indicates the parent of the node written at timet.
When a new comment arrives to the discussion, it is attached
to an existing nodej ∈1,..., t with probability proportional
to its attractiveness function φj(·), deﬁned as a combination
of the featuresθ=(α,τ,β)
φj(π1:t ; θ): =αdegj(π1:t ) +τt+1−j +βδj,1
p(πt+1 =j|π1:t ; θ) ∝φj(π1:t ; θ), (4)
where degj(π1:t ) is the degree of nodej in the treeπ1:t and δ
is the Kronecker delta function, i.e.βis only relevant for the
root node.
The model parameters are estimated through max-
imum likelihood given a dataset composed of M
threads D = {π(1),...,π (M)} corresponding to a par-
ticular period of time.
The previous generative model may fail in describing
some structural properties, such as the average depth of
a comment, which tends to be underestimated, as noted
in Gómez et al. (2013). This is actually the case in Menéame,
which is characterized by very deep threads with long chains
of messages between two alternating users, as shown in Fig-
ure 4. We postulate that the original model fails to capture
precisely that commenting behavior tends to be reciprocal,
16
(a) Thread in 2013.
https://www.meneame.net/story/1860558
(b) Thread in 2015.
https://www.meneame.net/story/2484585
Figure 4: Visualization of two example threads before (a) and after (b) the conversation view was modiﬁed. Black node is the
root of the thread (the post). Gray nodes are ﬁrst level comments. The other nodes are replies to comments where comments
written by the same user get the same color. Node size corresponds to the number of received comments, except for the root.
i.e. users tend to reply comments that are replies to their pre-
vious comments. In the next section, we extend the original
model with an authorship model and introduce a new fea-
ture: the reciprocity.
Extending the model
We now represent a conversation thread with the parent
vector π
1:t together with a vector of respective authors
a1:t = (a1,a2,..., at ). The authorship vector will grow de-
pending on the structure of the discussion, which in turn will
depend on the authorship of the messages.
Our author model does not allow two consecutive com-
ments to be written by the same user. Furthermore, a user
cannot self-reply a comment made by herself. LetU denote
the number of diﬀerent users that participated in the conver-
sation so far. At timet +1, a new comment is originated from
a new user with idU +1 with probabilityp
new, or otherwise
from an existing userv chosen according to how many times
user v has been replied in the thread,rv. Our author model is
described as
p(at+1 =v|a1:t ,π1:t ) =
⎧⎪⎪
⎨⎪⎪
⎩
p
new, for v =U +1
(1−pnew )2rv
∑ U
i=1 2ri , for v ∈1,..., U (5)
We set pnew empirically to pnew =t−1/k and estimate k from
the data (k≈7). Notice that the preferential attachment pro-
cess that selects authors is multiplicative. This is required
to capture well the probability distribution of the number of
comments per unique author in a thread. Once the author
a
t+1 is decided, the new comment is attached to an exist-
ing comment j proportionally to the extended attractiveness
function φ′
j(·), which now depends on the vector of authors
a1:t and the parametersθ′=(α,τ,β,κ)
φ′
j(π1:t ,a1:t ; θ′): =φj(π1:t ; θ) +κδaπj ,at+1
p′(πt+1 =j|π1:t ,a1:t ; θ′) ∝φ′
j(π1:t ; θ′), (6)
where the additional termκδaπj ,at+1 is non-zero for reciprocal
comments only andφj(·) is the original (author-independent)
attractiveness function given in Equation (4).
The new parameter κdetermines how strong reciprocal
comments are weighted. Only those replies to comments au-
thored by the selected author, i.e.a
πj =at+1, will contribute
to the κ-term. Thus, for κ=0 the new feature will play no
role in the evolution of the thread whereas very large values
of κwill make all comments of corresponding users recip-
rocal. The additional parameter κcan be optimized using
maximum likelihood together withα,βand τ
3.
We ﬁrst compare the original model and the proposed ex-
tension and then we analyze how the change in the inter-
face aﬀects the model parameters. To show that the extended
model not only reproduces better the depths, we also com-
pare the two models using the same indicators as in Gómez
et al. (2013). Figure 5 shows that the distribution of the num-
ber of replies, subthreads sizes and the relation between the
thread sizes and depths are reproduced signiﬁcantly better
thanks to the authorship model and the reciprocity feature.
Figure 6 shows the empirical probability distributions
(pdf) of the depth of a comment calculated from the real
threads and from synthetic ones generated from both mod-
els after optimizing their respective parameters. Whereas
3The source code for estimating the model parameters given a
collection of threads can be found here:
git@bitbucket.org:vicengomez/threads.git
17
number of replies
10 0 10 1 10 2
cdf
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
data
original (KS=0.108)
with authors (KS=0.057)
subthreads sizes
10 0 10 1 10 2
cdf
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
data
original (KS=0.110)
with authors (KS=0.019)
size
10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3
depth
10 0
10 1
data
original
with authors
Figure 5: Comparison between the original model (in red) and the extended model with authorship and reciprocity (in blue) in
terms of how well they reproduce the real discussion threads (gray circles). The plots show the cumulative distribution function
(cdf) of the degrees (left), subtree sizes (center) and the correlation between depth and number of comments (right). The curves
where obtained from 2·10
3 threads generated from both models after optimization of their respective parameters. Dashed lines
in the right subplot correspond to linear ﬁts in the logarithmic domain. KS indicates Kolmogorov-Smirnov test value (the lower
the better).
depth
5 1 01 52 02 53 03 54 0
pdf
10 -4
10 -2
10 0
data
original model (KS=0.251)
with authorship (KS=0.063)
Figure 6: Probability distribution of the comment’s depths.
The original model fails to capture the long tail created by
reciprocal message chains whereas the proposed model is
able to reproduce the data accurately. The curves where ob-
tained from 2 ·10
3 threads generated from both models af-
ter optimization of their respective parameters. KS indicates
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test value (the lower the better).
the resulting depths using the original model are underes-
timated (red curve), the extended model is able to gener-
ate deeper threads and to reproduce better the depth dis-
tribution. In particular, it captures the tail behavior accu-
rately and the observed discrepancies are only minor. The
KS test accepts the model hypothesis at the 5% conﬁdence
level (p-value =0.0041). The synthetic threads also contain
chains of messages with alternating users, as in the original
data.
We thus conclude that by increasing minimally the com-
plexity of the model with the authorship model and the reci-
procity, the overall descriptive power of the model is greatly
improved.
Impact of conversation threading on behavioral
features
We now analyze how the platform change aﬀected the evo-
lution of the threads by ﬁtting the extended model to data
from diﬀerent periods of time. In Figure 7 we present the re-
sults of the RDD on the four estimated parameters, each of
them corresponding to one of the features (see the appendix
for the numerical details of the results).
Globally, we observe notable increases in all the parame-
ters after the platform change. The most noticeable change
corresponds to the reciprocity feature, parameterized by κ
(see the change of order of magnitude in Figure 7). Once the
hierarchical view is active, users behave signiﬁcantly more
reciprocally and tend to engage more in dialogues. These
ﬁndings are consistent with the above one for the corrected
and the weighted reciprocity metrics.
The other features also show an abrupt increase after the
platform change, but to a lesser extent. We emphasize that
the interplay between the features may be nontrivial, even
mediated by a hidden, not modeled feature, since the rel-
ative weights diﬀer between the two conditions. Neverthe-
less, since reciprocity is only relevant at the later stages of
the discussions, where comments are written from existing
authors that have already been replied, their relevance is also
increased after the platform change. Finally, it is interesting
to mention that the same analysis performed in the original
model was unable to detect a signiﬁcant change in parame-
ters βand αat the time of the platform intervention.
Discussion
We have presented a study about the impact of conversa-
tion threading in online discussions. While previous stud-
ies in this ﬁeld (McV erry 2007; Fuks, Pimentel, and De Lu-
cena 2006; V enolia and Neustaedter 2003; Smith, Cadiz, and
18
time
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
5
10
15
β (bias root)
time
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
α (popularity)
time
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
τ (novelty decay)
time
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
50
100
150
200
κ (author reciprocity)
Figure 7: Regression discontinuity (RD) analysis for the metrics of the structural properties of discussions (bin size =one
month). V ertical line indicates the cutoﬀobtained through the F-test. Red circles are data points before the cutoﬀand blue
triangles data points after the cutoﬀ. The solid line is the discontinuous linear regression, the dashed line is the continuous
linear regression corresponding to the null model. The analysis shows that the four model parameters present a break and an
increase of the slope after the cutoﬀ.
Burkhalter 2000) had relied on experiments recruiting small
groups of participants, our ﬁndings are observed in an ex-
isting, large and mature community with over ﬁve years of
online discussion data.
We ﬁrst analyze how the implementation of conversa-
tion threading aﬀects the reciprocity in the discussion of
an online community (RQ1). One would expect reciprocity
to increase since a hierarchical conversation view empha-
sizes the exchange of messages between users. Indeed, al-
though we already observe a natural increase of reciprocity
over time, as suggested in Fisher, Smith, and Welser (2006),
the adoption of this type of interface triggers an additional
boost leading to even higher levels of reciprocity. This is a
positive behavioral indicator for online communities (Well-
man and Gulia 1999; Herring et al. 2004; Plickert, Cote,
and Wellman 2007), and it is aligned with previous work
on the beneﬁts of hierarchical views for constructing knowl-
edge (McV erry 2007), providing better context of the dis-
cussion (Fuks, Pimentel, and De Lucena 2006; V enolia and
Neustaedter 2003) and improving coherence (Smith, Cadiz,
and Burkhalter 2000). Our results have implications for the
characterization of user roles in online discussion. Reci-
procity has been used to distinguish diﬀerent types of users
in online forums; e.g taciturns with low tendency to recip-
rocate interactions and grunts with relatively higher levels
of reciprocity (Chan, Hayes, and Daly 2010). Given that
users in social media change their role over time (García-
Gavilanes et al. 2014), this opens interesting research direc-
tions like assessing whether the distribution of user roles is
aﬀected by changing the conversation view.
The relevance of reciprocity in online discussion leads us
to reﬂect on the role of this behavioral pattern in the forma-
tion of discussion threads. The existing generative models of
discussion threads (Kumar, Mahdian, and McGlohon 2010;
Wang, Y e, and Huberman 2012; Gómez et al. 2013) include
features from messages like the popularity (number of in-
coming replies) or the novelty (timestamp). However, the
tendency of users to reply to the replies to their messages has
only been considered indirectly, a posteriori. For example,
although the authorship model of Kumar, Mahdian, and Mc-
Glohon (2010) establishes authors of messages to promote
the reciprocity of replies, it does it after the discussion thread
is generated and, therefore, reciprocity is ignored during the
growth of the discussion. Furthermore, all of these models
fail in modeling accurately the depth of discussion threads
which can be explained by the occurrence of long chains
of reciprocal interactions between two users, as postulated
in Pelaprat and Brown (2012) and empirically shown in Fig-
ure 4. This leads to our second research question (RQ2)
about whether reciprocity can improve the descriptive power
of models of discussion threads. To answer this question we
extend the model in Gómez et al. (2013) by incorporating
authorship and establishing reciprocity as a behavioral fea-
ture. This is an important diﬀerence from previous models
such as Kumar, Mahdian, and McGlohon (2010), in which
the structure of a thread does not depend explicitly on the au-
thorship. To the best of our knowledge, the presented model
is the ﬁrst in which the structure and authorship co-evolve
jointly. The results on discussion threads from Menéame
show that our approach not only captures better the distri-
bution of the number of replies and sizes of subthreads, it
also reproduces more accurately the temporal evolution of
the discussion threads in view of the distribution of the depth
of discussion threads.
The model extension includes reciprocity together with
the existing behavioral features of popularity, novelty, and
root-bias. This allows us to answer our third research ques-
tion (RQ3) which analyzes whether modeling discussion
threads can quantify the impact of the conversation view
on behavioral features. On the one hand, our results show
that the hierarchical view induced more reciprocal behav-
ior, which is consistent with the ﬁndings from the regres-
sion discontinuity design. On the other hand, we also ob-
serve that the transition to threaded discussion makes pop-
ular comments to attract more replies and slows down the
decay of novelty, i.e. comments take longer to be ignored.
This second eﬀect can be explained by the fact that the
hierarchical view on Menéame does not apply comment
folding and, therefore, branches of comments are always
fully expanded. With this type of interface, conversation
19
threading gives preference to the ﬁrst comments and their
replies, i.e. branches (and sub-branches) are ordered chrono-
logically. Although it is true that reciprocity increases and
online deliberation requires reciprocity (Schneider 1997;
Jensen 2003), new contributions with no connection with
previous arguments will be less visible to the community.
Given that deliberation also requires users gaining knowl-
edge of the perspectives of others (Habermas 1985), addi-
tional mechanisms (e.g. comment folding, branch sorting)
must receive special attention in the design of online discus-
sion platforms.
Our methodology is based on the structural properties
of the discussions and is language-independent. Therefore,
it can be easily applied to other platforms. For this rea-
son, modeling approaches like the ones applied here can
also be used to assess the impact of other features in on-
line discussion platforms and to compare the model parame-
ters in diﬀerent environments and communities. Moreover,
it might be of interest to extend these models to further
explore content-based features from the messages of the
discussions. Recent studies have suggested that linguistic
indications of reciprocity can measure the chance of suc-
cess of individual requests in online communities (Althoﬀ,
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jurafsky 2014). Also, hierar-
chical comment threads have been noted to represent a topi-
cal hierarchy in online discussions (Weninger, Zhu, and Han
2013). Therefore, future work might explore whether the
transition from a linear to a hierarchical conversation view
can also aﬀect the narrative structure and the distribution of
topics in online discussion.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Spanish Ministry of Econ-
omy and Competitiveness under the Maria de Maeztu Units
of Excellence Programme (MDM-2015-0502) and the EU
project D-CENT (FP7/CAPS 610349). We would like to
thank Helena Gallego for her suggestions that helped to im-
prove this manuscript.
References
Althoﬀ, T.; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C.; and Jurafsky, D.
2014. How to ask for a favor: A case study on the success of
altruistic requests. InEighth International AAAI Conference
on W eblogs and Social Media.
Aragón, P .; Gómez, V .; and Kaltenbrunner, A. 2016. Vi-
sualization Tool for Collective A wareness in a Platform of
Citizen Proposals. In ICWSM-16 - 10th International AAAI
Conference on W eb and Social Media. The AAAI Press.
Chan, J.; Hayes, C.; and Daly, E. M. 2010. Decompos-
ing discussion forums and boards using user roles.ICWSM
10:215–218.
Fisher, D.; Smith, M.; and Welser, H. T. 2006. Y ou are
who you talk to: Detecting roles in usenet newsgroups. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Con-
ference on System Sciences (HICSS’06), volume 3, 59b–59b.
IEEE.
Fuks, H.; Pimentel, M.; and De Lucena, C. J. P . 2006.
RU-Typing-2-Me? Evolving a chat tool to increase under-
standing in learning activities. International Journal of
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning1(1):117–142.
García-Gavilanes, R.; Kaltenbrunner, A.; Sáez-Trumper, D.;
Baeza-Y ates, R.; Aragón, P .; and Laniado, D. 2014. Who
are my audiences? A study of the evolution of target audi-
ences in microblogs. In International Conference on Social
Informatics, 561–572. Springer.
Garlaschelli, D., and Loﬀredo, M. I. 2004. Patterns of
link reciprocity in directed networks. Physical review let-
ters 93(26):268701.
Gómez, V .; Kappen, H. J.; Litvak, N.; and Kaltenbrunner,
A. 2013. A likelihood-based framework for the analysis of
discussion threads. W orld Wide W eb16(5-6):645–675.
Gómez, V .; Kappen, H. J.; and Kaltenbrunner, A. 2011.
Modeling the structure and evolution of discussion cascades.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM conference on Hypertext
and hypermedia, 181–190. ACM.
Graham, T., and Witschge, T. 2003. In search of online de-
liberation: Towards a new method for examining the quality
of online discussions.Communication, Sankt Augustin Then
Berlin 28(2):173–204.
Gray, K.; Ward, A. F.; and Norton, M. I. 2014. Paying it for-
ward: Generalized reciprocity and the limits of generosity.
Journal of experimental psychology: General143(1):247.
Habermas, J. 1985. The theory of communicative action,
volume 2. Beacon press.
Hale, S. A.; John, P .; Margetts, H. Z.; and Y asseri, T. 2014.
Investigating political participation and social information
using big data and a natural experiment.
Harasim, L. M. 1993. Global networks: Computers and
international communication. MIT Press.
Herring, S. C.; Barab, S.; Kling, R.; and Gray, J. 2004. An
approach to researching online behavior.Designing for vir-
tual communities in the service of learning338.
Janssen, D., and Kies, R. 2005. Online forums and deliber-
ative democracy. Acta política 40(3):317–335.
Jensen, J. L. 2003. Public spheres on the internet: Anar-
chic or government-sponsored–a comparison.Scandinavian
political studies 26(4):349–374.
Kollock, P ., and Smith, M. 2002. Communities in cy-
berspace. Routledge.
Kumar, R.; Mahdian, M.; and McGlohon, M. 2010. Dy-
namics of conversations. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, 553–562. ACM.
Lee, D. S., and Lemieux, T. 2010. Regression disconti-
nuity designs in economics. Journal of economic literature
48(2):281–355.
Malik, M. M., and Pfeﬀer, J. 2016. Identifying platform
eﬀects in social media data. In T enth International AAAI
Conference on W eb and Social Media.
McV
erry, J. G. 2007. Forums and functions of threaded
20
discussions. New England Reading Association Journal
43(1):79.
Pelaprat, E., and Brown, B. 2012. Reciprocity: Understand-
ing online social relations.First Monday 17(10).
Pimentel, M. G.; Fuks, H.; and de Lucena, C. J. P . 2003.
Co-text loss in textual chat tools. In Modeling and Using
Context. Springer. 483–490.
Plickert, G.; Cote, R. R.; and Wellman, B. 2007. It’s not
who you know, it’s how you know them: Who exchanges
what with whom? Social networks 29(3):405–429.
Rafaeli, S., and Sudweeks, F. 1997. Networked interactivity.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication2(4):0–0.
Schneider, S. M. 1997. Expanding the Public Sphere
through Computer-Mediated Communication: P olitical Dis-
cussion about Abortion in. Ph.D. Dissertation, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Seabright, P . 2010. The company of strangers: A natural
history of economic life. Princeton University Press.
Smith, M.; Cadiz, J. J.; and Burkhalter, B. 2000. Conver-
sation trees and threaded chats. InProceedings of the 2000
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
97–105. ACM.
Squartini, T.; Picciolo, F.; Ruzzenenti, F.; and Garlaschelli,
D. 2013. Reciprocity of weighted networks. Scientiﬁc re-
ports 3(2729).
Thistlethwaite, D. L., and Campbell, D. T. 1960.
Regression-discontinuity analysis: An alternative to the ex
post facto experiment. Journal of Educational psychology
51(6):309.
V enolia, G. D., and Neustaedter, C. 2003. Understanding
sequence and reply relationships within email conversations:
a mixed-model visualization. InProceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 361–
368. ACM.
Wang, C.; Y e, M.; and Huberman, B. A. 2012. From user
comments to on-line conversations. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, 244–252. ACM.
Wellman, B., and Gulia, M. 1999. Net surfers don’t ride
alone: Virtual communities as communities. Networks in
the global village331–366.
Weninger, T.; Zhu, X. A.; and Han, J. 2013. An exploration
of discussion threads in social news sites: A case study of the
reddit community. In Advances in Social Networks Analy-
sis and Mining (ASONAM), 2013 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on, 579–583. IEEE.
Appendix: Regression Discontinuity Design
Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) is a statistical test
that measures causal eﬀects in cases where an arbitrarily
strict cutoﬀalong one covariate exists. In the linear case the
regression is:
Y
i =ω0 +ω1 ·xi +ω2 ·
 (xi >c) +ω3 ·xi ·
 (xi >c) +ϵi,
where xi is the time-stamp of a bin,Yi is the average value
of bin i (bin size =one month), ωi are the coeﬃcients of the
regression, ϵi is a random error term, andc is the cutoﬀ.
Linear RDD ﬁts two diﬀerent linear functions, before and
after the cutoﬀ, and allows to quantify the break between
both ﬁtted lines at the cutoﬀ. The null hypothesis is that there
is no discontinuity (the metric is not aﬀected by the release
of the new conversation view), i.e.ω
2 ≈0 and ω3 ≈0.
The cutoﬀin classical RDD is the intervention given in
the experiment. In the context of platform eﬀects for our
study, the cutoﬀis expected to be the time when the conver-
sation view was modiﬁed in Menéame. However, we should
note that, by deﬁnition, a discontinuous regression with a
cutoﬀat midpoint of the time series is likely to better ﬁt
data than a continuous regression. Therefore, to enhance the
robustness of our analysis and to prove the statistical sig-
niﬁcance of the change of the conversation view, we use an
F-test, as suggested in Lee and Lemieux (2010), to set the
cutoﬀas the most signiﬁcant point in the time series.
In all RDD reported results, we prevented biased esti-
mates of the treatment e ﬀect by checking that the linear
model represented a good model using a statistical analysis
of the residuals.
In our ﬁrst experiment visualized in Figure 3 the ob-
tained values in the RDD for the corrected reciprocity ρ
are break = 0.019,ω
2 = −0.171 and ω3 = 0.004. The
corresponding values for the weighted reciprocity rw are
break =0.021, ω2 =−0.192 and ω3 =0.004.
In our second experiment, results shown in Figure 7, we
obtained the following RDD values for the reciprocity fea-
ture κ(break =51.28; ω
2 =−287.78; ω3 =7.06), the popu-
larity α(break =0.12; ω2 =−0.35 ; ω3 =0.01), the novelty
τ(break =0.08 ; ω2 =−0.15 ; ω3 =0.004), and the root-
bias β(break =3.72 ; ω2 =−1.90 ; ω3 =0.12).
21