SEISMIC: A Self-Exciting Point Process Model
for Predicting Tweet Popularity
Qingyuan Zhao
Stanford University
qyzhao@stanford.edu
Murat A. Erdogdu
Stanford University
erdogdu@stanford.edu
Hera Y . He
Stanford University
yhe1@stanford.edu
Anand Rajaraman
Stanford University
anand@cs.stanford.edu
Jure Leskovec
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Social networking websites allow users to create and share content.
Big information cascades of post resharing can form as users of
these sites reshare others’ posts with their friends and followers.
One of the central challenges in understanding such cascading be-
haviors is in forecasting information outbreaks, where a single post
becomes widely popular by being reshared by many users.
In this paper, we focus on predicting the ﬁnal number of reshares
of a given post. We build on the theory of self-exciting point pro-
cesses to develop a statistical model that allows us to make accu-
rate predictions. Our model requires no training or expensive fea-
ture engineering. It results in a simple and efﬁciently computable
formula that allows us to answer questions, in real-time, such as:
Given a post’s resharing history so far, what is our current estimate
of its ﬁnal number of reshares? Is the post resharing cascade past
the initial stage of explosive growth? And, which posts will be the
most reshared in the future?
We validate our model using one month of complete Twitter data
and demonstrate a strong improvement in predictive accuracy over
existing approaches. Our model gives only 15% relative error in
predicting ﬁnal size of an average information cascade after ob-
serving it for just one hour.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.2.8 [Database Manage-
ment]: Database applications— Data mining
General Terms: Algorithms; Experimentation.
Keywords: information diffusion; cascade prediction; self-exciting
point process; contagion; social media.
1. INTRODUCTION
Online social networking services, such as Facebook, Youtube,
and Twitter, allow their users to post and share content in the form
of posts, images, and videos [9, 17, 21, 30]. As a user is exposed
to posts of others she follows, the user may in turn reshare a post
with her own followers, who may further reshare it with their re-
spective sets of followers. This way large information cascades of
post resharing spread through the network.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
KDD’15,August 10-13, 2015, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
c⃝2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3664-2/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2783401.
A fundamental question in modeling information cascades is to
predict their future evolution. Arguably the most direct way to for-
mulate this question is to consider predicting the ﬁnal size of an
information cascade. That is, to predict how many reshares a given
post will ultimately receive.
Predicting the ultimate popularity of a post is important for con-
tent ranking and aggregation. For instance, Twitter is overﬂowing
with posts and users have a hard time keeping up with all of them.
Thus, much of the content gets missed and eventually lost. Accu-
rate prediction would allow Twitter to rank content better, discover
trending posts faster, and improve its content-delivery networks.
Moreover, predicting information cascades allows us to gain fun-
damental insights into predictability of collective behaviors where
uncoordinated actions of many individuals lead to spontaneous out-
comes, for example, large information outbreaks.
Most research on predicting information cascades involves ex-
tracting an exhaustive set of features describing the past evolution
of a cascade and then using these features in a simple machine
learning classiﬁer to make a prediction about future growth [4, 6,
17, 20, 26, 30]. However, feature extraction can be expensive and
cumbersome, and one is never sure if more effective features could
be extracted. The question remains how to design a simple and
principled bottom-up model of cascading behavior. The challenge
lies in deﬁning a model for an individual’s behavior and then ag-
gregating the effects of the individuals in order to make an accurate
global prediction.
Present work. Here we focus on predicting the ﬁnal size of an in-
formation cascade spreading through a network. We develop a sta-
tistical model based on the theory of self-exciting point processes.
A point process indexed by time is called a counting process when
it counts the number of instances (reshares, in our case) over time.
In contrast to homogeneous Poisson processes which assume con-
stant intensity over time, self-exciting processes assume that all the
previous instances (i.e., reshares) inﬂuence the future evolution of
the process. Self-exciting point processes are frequently used to
model “rich get richer” phenomena [22, 23, 33, 36]. They are ideal
for modeling information cascades in networks because every new
reshare of a post not only increases its cumulative reshare count by
one, but also exposes new followers who may further reshare the
post.
We develop SEISMIC (Self-Exciting Model of Information Cas-
cades) for predicting the total number of reshares of a given post.
In our model, each post is fully characterized by its infectiousness
which measures the reshare probability. We allow the infectious-
ness to vary freely over time in agreement with the observation that
the infectiousness can drop as the content gets stale (see Figure 1).
arXiv:1506.02594v1  [cs.SI]  8 Jun 2015
0
25
50
75
0 2 4 6
Retweet Count
Histogram of Retweet Times
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0 2 4 6
Infectiousness
Infectiousness Estimated by SEISMIC
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
0 2 4 6
Time since original tweet (hour)
Retweets
Truth SEISMIC LR Observed
Prediction by SEISMIC
Figure 1: First 6 hours of retweeting activity of a popular
tweet [1] (top). The controversial tweet is about the fresh death
of dictator Muammar Gaddaﬁ and mentions singer Justin
Bieber. Interestingly, the car manufacturer Chevrolet Twitter
account inappropriately retweeted the tweet about 30 minutes
after the original tweet, which possibly lead to tweet’s sustained
popularity. Tweet infectiousness against time as estimated by
SEISMIC (middle). Predictions of the tweet’s ﬁnal retweet count
(denoted as “Truth”) as a function of time (bottom). We com-
pare SEISMIC with time series linear regression (LR), “Ob-
served” plots the cumulative number of observed retweets by a
given time. Notice SEISMIC quickly ﬁnds an accurate estimate
of the tweet’s ﬁnal retweet count.
Moreover, our model is able to identify at each time point whether
the cascade is in the supercritical or subcritical state, based on
whether its infectiousness is above or below a critical threshold.
A cascade in the supercritical state is going through an “explosion”
period and its ﬁnal size cannot be predicted accurately at the cur-
rent time. On the contrary, a cascade is tractable if it is in subcriti-
cal state. In this case, we are able to predict its ultimate popularity
accurately by modeling the future cascading behavior by a Galton-
Watson tree.
Our SEISMIC approach makes several contributions:
•Generative model: SEISMIC imposes no parametric assump-
tions and requires no expensive feature engineering. More-
over, as complete social network structure may be hard to ob-
tain, S EISMIC assumes minimal knowledge of the network:
The only required input is the time history of reshares and
the degrees of the resharing nodes.
•Scalable computation: Making a prediction using SEISMIC
only requires computational time linear in the number of ob-
served reshares. Since predictions for individual posts can be
made independently, our algorithm can also be easily paral-
lelized.
•Ease of interpretation: For an individual cascade, the model
synthesizes all its past history into a single infectiousness pa-
rameter. This infectiousness parameter holds a clear mean-
ing, and can serve as input to other applications.
We evaluate S EISMIC on one month of complete Twitter data,
where users post tweets which others can then reshare by retweet-
ing them. We demonstrate that S EISMIC is able to predict the ﬁ-
nal retweet count of a given tweet with 30% better accuracy than
the state-of-the-art approaches ( e.g., [12]). For reasonably popu-
lar tweets, our model achieves 15% relative error in predicting the
ﬁnal retweet count after observing the tweet for 1 hour, and 25%
error after observing the tweet for just 10 minutes. Moreover, we
also demonstrate how S EISMIC is able to identify tweets that will
go “viral” and be among the most popular tweets in the future. By
maintaining a dynamic list of 500 tweets over time, we are able to
identify 78 of the 100 most reshared tweets and 281 of the 500 most
reshared tweets in just 10 minutes after they are posted.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 sur-
veys the related work. Section 3 describes SEISMIC , and Section 4
shows how the model can be used to predict the ﬁnal size of an
information cascade. We evaluate our method and compare its per-
formance with a number of baselines as well as state-of-the-art ap-
proaches in Section 5. Last, in Section 6, we conclude and discuss
future research directions.
2. RELATED WORK
The study of information cascades is a rich and active ﬁeld [27].
Recent models for predicting size of information cascades are gen-
erally characterized by two types of approaches, feature based meth-
ods and point process based methods.
Feature based methods ﬁrst extract an exhaustive list of poten-
tially relevant features, including content features, original poster
features, network structural features, and temporal features [6]. Then
different learning algorithms are applied, such as simple regression
models [2, 6], probabilistic collaborative ﬁltering [35], regression
trees [3], content-based models [24], and passive-aggressive algo-
rithms [26]. There are several issues with such approaches: labori-
ous feature engineering and extensive training are crucial for their
success, and the performance is highly sensitive to the quality of
the features [4, 30]. Such approaches also have limited applicabil-
ity because they cannot be used in real-time online settings—given
the massive amount of posts being produced every second, it is
practically impossible to extract all the necessary features for every
post and then apply complicated prediction rules. In contrast, SEIS -
MIC requires no feature engineering and results in an efﬁciently
computable formula that allows it to predict the ﬁnal popularity of
millions of posts as they are spreading through the network.
The second type of approach is based on point processes, which
directly models the formation of an information cascade in a net-
work. Such models were mostly developed for the complementary
problem of network inference, where one observes a number of in-
formation cascades and tries to infer the structure of the underlying
network over which the cascades propagated [8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 18,
33, 36]. These methods have been successfully applied to study the
spread of memes on the web [10, 14, 32, 33] as well as hashtags on
Symbol Description
w Post/information cascade
pt Infectiousness of wat time t(Section 3.2)
φ(s) Memory kernel (Section 3.1)
i Node that contributed ith reshare.
i= 0 corresponds to the originator of the post.
ti Time of the ith reshare relative to the original post.
ni Out-Degree of the ith node
Rt Cumulative popularity by time t: |{i> 0; ti ≤t}|
R∞ Final popularity (ﬁnal number of reshares): |{i> 0}|
Nt Cumulative degree of resharers by time t: ∑
i:ti≤tni
Ne
t Effective cumulative degree of resharers by time t:
Ne
t = ∑Rt
i=0 ni
∫t
ti
φ(s−ti)ds
λt Intensity of cumulative popularity Rt
ˆpt Model’s estimate of infectiousnesspt at time t
ˆR∞(t) Model’s estimate at timetof ﬁnal popularity R∞
Table 1: Table of symbols.
Twitter [36]. In contrast, our goal is not to infer the network but to
predict the ultimate size of a cascade in an observed network.
A major distinction between our model and existing methods
based on Hawkes processes ( e.g., [22, 23, 33, 34, 36]) is that we
assume the process intensity λt depends on another stochastic pro-
cess pt, the post infectiousness. In other words, we allow the in-
fectiousness to change over time. Moreover, some of these meth-
ods [34] rely on computationally expensive Bayesian inference,
while our method has linear time complexity. Another recently
proposed related work is [12], which also takes the point process
approach and directly aims to predict tweet popularity. However,
their method makes restrictive parametric assumptions and does not
consider the network structure, which limits its predictive ability.
We compare S EISMIC with [12] in Section 5 and demonstrate a
30% improvement.
3. MODELING INFORMATION CASCADES
In this section, we describe S EISMIC and discuss how it can be
used for:
1. Estimating the spreading rate of a given information cascade,
which we quantify by the post’s infectiousness.
2. Determining whether the cascade is in supercritical (explo-
sive) or subcritical (dying out) state.
3. Predicting the ﬁnal size of an information cascade, which is
measured by the ultimate number of reshares received by the
post that started the cascade.
Important quantities in our model are the total number of re-
shares Rt of a given post up to time t and the cascade speed of
spreading λt. In our model, λt is determined by the post infec-
tiousness pt and human reaction time. Our goal is to predict R∞,
the ﬁnal number of reshares.
Another important quantity in our model is the memory kernel
φ(s), which quantiﬁes the delay between a post arriving to a user’s
feed and the user resharing it. Intuitively, infectiousness deﬁnes the
probability that a given user will reshare a given post, and the mem-
ory kernel models user’s reaction time. By combining the two we
can then accurately model the speed at which the post will spread
through the network. Table 1 summarizes the notation.
3.1 Human reaction time
In order to predict the cascade size, we need to know how long
it takes for a person to reshare a post. Knowing the delay allows
us to accurately model the speed of a cascade spreading through
the network. We consider that the time s between the arrival of
a post in a users’ timeline and a reshare of the post by the user
is distributed with density φ(s). The probability density φ(s) is
also called a memory kernel because it measures a physical/social
system’s memory of stimuli [7].
The distribution of human response timeφ(s) has been shown to
be heavy-tailed in social networks [5]. Usually the tail of φ(s) is
assumed to follow a power-law with exponent between 1 and 2 or
a log-normal distribution [7, 34]. However, due to the rapid nature
of information sharing on Twitter, it is also natural to expect many
instant reaction times. In fact, our exploratory data analysis in Sec-
tion 5.2 conﬁrms that in Twitter,φ(s) is approximately constant for
the ﬁrst 5 minutes and then followed by a power-law decay. Dif-
ferent social networks may have different distributions of human
reaction times. However, φ(s) only needs to be estimated once per
network and thus we can safely assume it is given. We describe a
detailed estimation procedure of φ(s) in Section 5.2.
3.2 Post infectiousness
The second component of our model is the post infectiousness.
We assume each postwis associated with a time dependent, intrin-
sic infectiousness parameter pt(w). In other words, pt(w) models
how likely the post w is to be reshared at time t. Infectiousness
of a post may depend on a combination of factors, including but
not limited to the quality of the post’s content, the social network
structure, the current local time, and the geographical location. In-
stead of assuming a parametric form ofpt, we model it ﬂexibly in a
nonparametric way which implicitly accounts for all these factors.
Most existing methods studying self-exciting point processes as-
sume pt to be ﬁxed over time. Consequently, an important concept
is the criticality of the process Rt. In a self-exciting point process
with constant infectiousness pt ≡p, there exists a phase transition
phenomenon at certain critical threshold p∗such that [11]:
1. If p > p∗, then Rt → ∞as t → ∞almost surely and
exponentially fast. This is called the supercritical regime.
2. If p < p∗, then suptRt < ∞almost surely. This is called
the subcritical regime.
In reality, Rt is always bounded due to the ﬁnite size of the net-
work. Thus, no supercritical cascades can exist if pt is assumed to
be a constant. This is inadequate to model highly contagious tweets
and our assumption of non-constant infectiousness solve this prob-
lem as well. Furthermore, as the post gets older the information
becomes outdated and its spreading power (infectiousness) may de-
crease. This effect may also be observed as the post spreads further
away from the original poster [34]. Alternatively, resharing by a
highly inﬂuential user may increase the post’s infectiousness. Thus,
rather than assuming a common evolutionary pattern of pt for all
the tweets, we only assume it varies smoothly over time and use
non-parametric methods to estimate pt for each tweet.
3.3 The SEISMIC model
We combine human reaction times and post infectiousness to de-
rive S EISMIC . In order to link pt to the post resharing process
Rt, we model Rt as a doubly stochastic self-exciting point process.
This is an extension to the standard self-exciting point process (also
called the Hawkes process [16]) which was initially used to model
earthquakes [25].
We ﬁrst deﬁne the intensityλtof Rt, which simply measures the
rate of obtaining an additional reshare at time t. More formally:
λt = lim
∆↓0
P(Rt+∆ −Rt = 1)
∆ .
In S EISMIC , the intensity λt at time t is determined by infec-
tiousness pt, reshare times ti, node degrees ni, and human reaction
time distribution φ(s). The exact relationship described in Eq. (1)
is inspired by the theory of Hawkes processes [16]:
λt = pt ·
∑
ti≤t,i≥0
niφ(t−ti), t ≥t0. (1)
Intuitively, ∑
ti≤t,i≥0 niφ(t−ti) is the intensity of the arrival
of newly exposed users at time tand its product with the resharing
probability pt gives the intensity of reshares at time t.
Note that the above point process is called self-exciting because
each previous observation isuch that ti ≤tcontributes to the in-
tensity λt, or equivalently, each observation increases the intensity
in the future. It is further doubly stochastic (or a Cox process) be-
cause the infectiousness pt is itself a stochastic process.
Additionally, we assume node degrees{ni}are independent and
identically distributed with mean n∗. Mean degree n∗is related to
the critical threshold p∗which is already discussed in Section 3.2.
The critical infectiousness threshold takes value p∗ = 1/n∗. We
give the proof of this fact in Proposition 4.1.
4. PREDICTING INFORMATION CASCADES
In this section we describe how to perform statistical inference
for the self-exciting model of information cascades introduced in
the previous section. Speciﬁcally, we discuss how S EISMIC esti-
mates the infectiousness parameterptand then predicts the ultimate
size of the cascade R∞.
Throughout this section, we make a technical assumption that
the followers of all the resharers are disjoint, so we can use a tree
structure to describe the information diffusion (Figure 2). The con-
clusions made in this section remain valid even if resharers are not
disjoint. In this case, we can replace the node degree ni with the
total number of newly exposed neighbors of node i(the followers
of i-th resharer who do not follow the ﬁrst i−1 resharers).
4.1 Estimating post infectiousness
We ﬁrst deﬁne thesample-function density, which plays a central
role in estimating self-exciting point processes [29]. Let’s denote
Ft = σ
(
{(ni,ti)}Rt
i=0
)
as the σ-algebra generated by all the in-
formation available by time t: the times ti of all the reshares up
to time tand the number of followers ( i.e., node degree) ni of the
i-th user to reshare. Sample-function density is deﬁned as the joint
probability of the number of reshares in the time interval[t0,t) and
the density of their occurrence times.
To motivate our estimator ofpt, we ﬁrst consider the case where
the infectiousness parameter remains constant over time, i.e., pt ≡
p. Later we will relax this assumption and allow pt to vary over
time.
In SEISMIC , the sample-function density can be expressed using
the intensity λt as [29, Thm. 6.2.2]
P(Rt = r,t1,...,t r) =
Rt∏
i=1
λti ·exp
{
−
∫ t
t0
λsds
}
. (2)
By taking derivative of the log of Eq. (2) and combining it with
Eq. (1), we obtain the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of pt:
ˆpt = Rt
∑Rt
i=0 ni
∫t
ti
φ(s−ti)ds
(3)
The above equation forms the basis of S EISMIC as it allows us
to estimate the infectiousness ˆpt at any given time t. Moreover, a
conﬁdence interval of pt can also be obtained [29].
The denominator in Eq. (3), denoted as Ne
t hereafter, can be in-
terpreted as the accumulative “effective” number of exposed users
to the post. The numerator Rt is the current number of reshares
of the post. To shed more light on our estimator, we take t →∞,
which leads to:
ˆp(∞) = 1
1
R∞
∑R∞
j=0 nj
≈ 1
n∗
(4)
Thus, by assuming the infectiousness pt to be a constant over time,
one would essentially assume that most posts have the same infec-
tiousness 1/n∗. However, such assumption is unrealistic as it can-
not explain the bursty and volatile dynamics information cascades
(e.g., Figure 1).
This undesirable consequence of assuming constantptis another
motivation for allowing pt to vary over time. To estimate pt in this
case, we smooth the MLE in Eq. (3) by only using observations
close to time tto estimate pt. In particular, we rely on a sequence
of one-sided kernels Kt(s), s > 0, indexed by time t. We use
these kernels to weight the reshares and the weighted estimate of
pt is given by
ˆpt =
∫t
t0
Kt(t−s)dRs
∫t
t0
Kt(t−s)dNes
=
∑Rt
i=1 Kt(t−ti)∑Rt
i=0 ni
∫t
ti
Kt(t−s)φ(s−ti)ds
.
(5)
Notice that when Kt(s) ≡1 the estimator reduces to the MLE
we derived in Eq. (3). In S EISMIC we use a triangular kernel with
growing window size t/2 as weighting kernel Kt(s):
Kt(s) = max
{
1 −2s
t ,0
}
, s> 0. (6)
We chose the triangular kernel because it has properties impor-
tant for our application. First, the kernel discards all posts that are
older than t/2. In particular, it quickly discards the unstable and
potentially explosive period at the beginning, which if included,
would introduce an upward bias topt. Second, the kernel takes into
account posts in a larger window size as time tincreases. Accord-
ing to our experiments, the growing window size helps to stabilize
ˆp(t) compared to a ﬁxed window size. Third, for reshares within
the window, the kernel up-weights the most recent posts and gradu-
ally down-weights older posts. This keeps our estimatorˆp(t) closer
to the ever-changing true pt. And last, as Kt(s) is piece-wise lin-
ear, the integral
∫
Kt(t−s)φ(s−ti)dshas a closed form for many
different functions φ(s) including the one we use for Twitter in our
experiments, see Section 5.
4.2 Predicting ﬁnal popularity
Having described the procedure for inferring the post infectious-
ness, we now need to account for the network structure in order to
predict how far the post is going to spread across the network.
For simplicity, let us assume the post is ﬁrst posted at time0, i.e.,
t0 = 0. Consider we have observed the post for ttime units and
our goal now is to predict the post’s ﬁnal reshare count,R∞, based
on the information we have observed so far, Ft.
The following proposition shows how to compute the expected
ﬁnal reshare count of a post. The main idea is to model an informa-
tion cascade spreading over the network with a branching process
that counts the reshare number of a post, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Predictor for R∞used by SEISMIC can be stated as follows:
Figure 2: An illustration of the information diffusion tree. We
observe the cascade up to time t (denoted by a dashed line)
and the question is how the cascade tree is going to grow in
the future. We deﬁne variables Zk which denote the number
of reshares caused by the kth generation descendants. Using
variables Zk the ﬁnal reshare count R∞ can then be simply
computer as Rt +
∞∑
k=1
Zk.
PROPOSITION 4.1. Assume the (out-)degrees in the network are
i.i.d. with expectation n∗and the infectiousness parameter ps is a
constant pfor s≥t. Then, we have
E[R∞|Ft] =



Rt + p(Nt −Ne
t)
1 −pn∗
, if p< 1
n∗
,
∞, if p≥ 1
n∗
.
(7)
PROOF. First, we consider the case where p< 1/n∗. We deﬁne
a sequence of random variables {Z1,Z2,Z3,... }that models the
future information diffusion tree, as illustrated in Figure 2. In this
tree, Zk denotes the number of reshares made by the kth genera-
tion descendants (counting from generation Rt onward). Thus, the
1st generation descendants Z1 refers to the number of new reshares
generated by the posts created before time t, the 2 nd generation
descendants Z2 refers to the reshares of the posts of the 1st descen-
dants, and so on. Notice that the summation over theZk’s gives the
post’s ﬁnal reshare countR∞= Rt + ∑∞
k=1 Zk. In the following
we use descendants Zk only for deriving Eq. (7) and emphasize
that our ﬁnal estimator does not require explicit network structure
information.
Given Z1, the sequence of random variablesZkdeﬁnes a Galton-
Watson tree with the offspring expectation µ= n∗p[11]. Here, µ
denotes the expected number of reshares that the post gets. Using a
standard branching process result, we have Zi/µi is a martingale.
Therefore, ∀k> 1, E [Zk+1|Zk] = µZk, and,
E
[∞∑
k=1
Zk
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐Z1
]
= Z1
(1 −µ) = Z1
(1 −n∗p) .
Hence, we obtain
E[R∞|Ft] = Rt + E
[∞∑
k=1
Zk
]
= Rt + E[Z1]
(1 −n∗p),
which ends up being the right hand side in Eq. (7) becauseE[Z1] =
p(Nt −Ne
t) by the deﬁnition of Z1 and Ne
t.
Algorithm 1 SEISMIC : Predict ﬁnal cascade size
Purpose: For a given post at timet, predict its ﬁnal reshare count
Input: Post resharing information: ti and ni for i= 0,...,R t.
Algorithm:
Nt = 0, Ne
t = 0
for i= 0,...,R t do
Nt += ni
Ne
t += ni
∫t
ti
φ(s−ti)ds (Sec. 3.1)
end for
ˆR∞(t) = Rt + αtˆpt(Nt −Ne
t)/(1 −γtˆptn∗) (Alg. 2)
Deliver: ˆR∞(t)
Next, consider the case where p = ˆpt ≥1/n∗. In this regime,
the point process is supercritical and stays explosive. In terms of
the Galton-Watson tree discussed above, the offspring expectation
µ = n∗p ≥1, so E[Zk+1] ≥E[Zk] ≥···≥ E[Z1]. Therefore
the total future reshares ∑∞
k=1 Zk has inﬁnite expectation and the
ﬁnal reshare count cannot be reliably predicted.
Note that Prop. 4.1 assumes that the post infectiousness remains
constant in the future ( ps = pt for s ≥t), which could be unre-
alistic for some information cascades. We correct this by changing
the prediction formula in Eq. (7) by adding two scaling constants
αt,γt that adjust the ﬁnal prediction:
ˆR∞(t) = Rt + αt
ˆpt(Nt −Ne
t)
1 −γtˆptn∗
, 0 <αt,γt <1 . (8)
We introduce these correction factors based on the following intu-
ition. We expect αt to decrease over time tso it scales down the
estimated infectiousness in the future, which accounts for the post
getting stale and outdated. Similarly, γt accounts for the overlap
in the neighborhoods of reposters’ followers. Over time as the post
spreads farther in the network, we expect γt to increase as more
nodes get exposed multiple times, which means the arrival rate of
new nodes (previously unexposed nodes) decreases over time.
We use the same values ofαt and γt for all posts but allow them
to vary over time. The values of αt and γt are selected to mini-
mized median Absolute Percentage Error (refer to Section 5.4 for
deﬁnition) on a training data set. As described in Section 5.2, we
ﬁnd αt is more important than γt in practice.
4.3 The SEISMIC algorithm
Last, we put together all the components described so far and
synthesize them in the SEISMIC algorithm. The SEISMIC algorithm
for predicting ˆR∞(t) is described in Algorithm 1, which uses the
algorithm for computing ˆpt (Algorithm 2) as a subroutine. These
algorithms are based on Eqs. (5) and (8). We assume parameters
Kt(s), αt, γt, n∗are given a priori or estimated from the data.
Computational complexity of SEISMIC . For any choice of φ(s)
and Kt(s), the computational cost of S EISMIC is O(Rt) for both
calculating ˆptand predicting ˆR∞(t). Of course, the actual comput-
ing time depends heavily on the integration
∫t
ti
Kt(t−s)φ(s−ti)ds
and
∫t
ti
φ(s−ti)ds. However, the overall computational cost of
SEISMIC is linear in the observed number of resharesRt of a given
post by time t.
The linear time complexity is in part also due to the shape of our
memory kernel. In Section 5.2 we will estimate the memory kernel
φ(s) for Twitter to have the following form (for somes0 >0):
φ(s) =
{
c if 0 <s ≤s0,
c(s/s0)−(1+θ) if s>s 0. (9)
Algorithm 2 Compute real-time infectiousness ˆp(t)
Purpose: For a given post w, calculate infectiousness pt with
information about wprior to time t
Input: Post resharing information: ti and ni for i= 0,...,R t.
Algorithm:
˜Rt = 0, ˜Ne
t = 0
for i= 0,...,R t do
˜Rt += Kt(t−ti)
end for
for i= 0,...,R t do
˜Ne
t += ni
∫t
ti
Kt(t−s)φ(s−ti)ds (Sec. 4.1)
end for
pt = ˜Rt/˜Ne
t
Deliver: pt
This means that with the memory kernel φ(s) in Eq. (9) and tri-
angular weighting kernel Kt(s) in Eq. (6), both integrals can be
evaluated in closed form because they are piece-wise polynomials
(polynomial with possibly non-integer exponents), which greatly
decreases computational cost of SEISMIC .
5. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the Twitter data set, our parameter
estimation procedure, and compare the performance of SEISMIC to
state-of-the-art approaches.
5.1 Data description and data processing
Our data is the complete set of over 3.2 billion tweets and retweets
on Twitter from October 7 to November 7, 2011. For each retweet,
the dataset includes tweet id, posting time, retweet time, and the
number of followers of the poster/retweeter. Note, the data set lacks
Twitter network information. The only piece of network informa-
tion available to us is the number of followers of a node.
We focus on a subset of reasonably popular tweets with at least
50 retweets, so that our model enables the prediction as soon as
sufﬁcient number of retweets occur. Note, that if multiple Twitter
users independently post the same tweet, which then gets retweeted,
each original posting creates its own independent cascade. All in
all there are 166,076 tweets satisfying this criterion in the ﬁrst 15
days. We form the training set using the tweets from the ﬁrst 7
days and the test set using the tweets from the next 8 days. We
use the remaining 14 days for the retweet cascades to unfold and
evolve. For a particular retweet cascade, we obtain all the retweets
posted within 14 days of the original post time, i.e., we approxi-
mate R∞by R14 days. We estimate parameters φ(s),αt,γt and n∗
with the training set, and evaluate the performance of the estimator
ˆR∞on the test set. For the tweets in our training set, R14 days has
mean 209.8 and median 110. The temporal evolution of mean and
median of Rt are also shown in Figure 3.
5.2 SEISMIC parameter estimation
First we describe how to ﬁt the memory kernelφ(s) (Section 3.1).
We carefully choose 15 tweets in the training set and use the dis-
tribution of all their retweet times as our φ(s) (Figure 4). The his-
tograms of the 15 sequences of retweet times all display a clear
shape of subcritical decay. Moreover, all the original posters have
an overwhelming number of followers. Therefore, most of the
retweets, if not all, should come from the immediate followers of
the original poster. Consequently, the distribution of human reac-
tion time can be well approximated by that of the retweet times of
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
0
50
100
150
200
0 2 4 6
Time Since Original Post t (hour)
Cumulative Retweet Count R t ● Mean
Median
Evolution of the Number of Retweets
Figure 3: Convergence of the mean and media cumulative
retweet count Rt as a function of time.The horizontal lines cor-
respond to mean and median ﬁnal retweet count R14 days. On
average, a tweet receives 75% of its retweets in the ﬁrst 6 hours.
1e−02
1e−03
1e−04
1 5 20 60 300 900
Reaction Time s (minute)
Density
Fitted
Observed
Memory Kernel φ(s)
Figure 4: Reaction time distribution and the estimated memory
kernel φ(s). The reaction time is plotted on logarithmic axes,
hence the linear trend suggests a power law decay.
these 15 tweets. The estimation of φ(s) can be further improved if
the network structure is available.
The observed reaction time distribution (Figure 4) suggests a
form of Eq. (9) for the memory kernel: constant in the ﬁrst 5 min-
utes, followed by a power-law decay. After setting the constant
period s0 to 5 minutes, we estimate power law decay parameter
θ = 0.242 with the complimentary cumulative distribution func-
tion (ccdf), and chose c= 6.27 ×10−4 to make
∫∞
0 φ(s)ds= 1.
The memory kernel is a network wide parameter and only needs to
be estimated once. The ﬁtted memory kernel is plotted in Figure 4.
Last, we brieﬂy comment on the correction factors αt and γt in-
troduced in Eq. (7). We use the same values of αt and γt for all
tweets. Notice that γt and n∗only affect the predictions through
their product γtn∗. Overall, we ﬁnd the value of γtn∗ has little
effect on the performance of our algorithm. In our experiments we
simply set γtn∗ = 20 for all t. We choose the value of αt such
that it minimizes the training median Absolute Percentage Error
(Section 5.4). We report values of αt in Table 2. αt has a par-
ticularly small value at t = 5 minutes, which may be a result of
the overestimation of pt, when the triangular kernel has not moved
away from the unstable beginning period. After that αt begins a
time (minute) 5 10 15 20 30
α 0.389 0.803 0.772 0.709 0.680
time (minute) 60 120 180 240 360
α 0.562 0.454 0.378 0.352 0.326
Table 2: Values αt used in Algorithm 1.
slow and consistent decay to account for the fact that information
is getting increasingly stale and outdated over time.
With all the estimated parameters in S EISMIC , we are ready to
apply it (Algorithms 1 and 2) to the Twitter dataset. For a given
tweet w and every 5 minute interval t, we output our estimate
ˆR∞(t,w) of the tweet’s ﬁnal retweet countR∞(w).
5.3 Baselines for comparison
We consider four different prediction methods for comparison.
The ﬁrst two are regression based and the next two are point process
based.
•Linear regression (LR) [31]: The model can be deﬁned as
log R∞= αt + logRt + ϵ,
where ϵdenotes the Gaussian noise. This is also the second
baseline estimator used in [34]. Notice that all the tweets
receive the same multiplicative constant for a given time.
•Linear regression with degree (LR-D) [31]: This model
can be written as
log R∞= αt+ β1,tlog Rt+ β2,tlog Nt+ β3,tlog n0 + ϵ
where ϵdenotes, as before, the Gaussian noise. LR-D is more
ﬂexible than LR, since it allows log Rt to have a slope not
equal to 1 and uses additional features.
•Dynamic Poisson Model (DPM) [2, 7]:It models the retweet
times {tk}as a point process with rate
λt = λtpeak (t−tpeak)γ
where tpeak = arg maxs<tλs. The power-law parameterγis
estimated separately for each tweet. To discretize the model,
we bin the retweet times into b = 5 minute intervals. Note
that when γ >−1, the integral
∫∞
tpeak+bλtdtis inﬁnite. In
such cases, we move tpeak forward to the second maximum
bin.
•Reinforced Poisson Model (RPM) [12]: This recently pub-
lished state-of-the-art approach models the reshare rate as
λt = cfγ(t)rα(Rt)
where parameter c measures the attractiveness of the mes-
sage, fγ(t) ∝ t−γ(γ > 0) models the aging effect, and
rα(Rt)(α >0) is the reinforcement function which depicts
the “rich get richer” phenomenon. Given a particular tweet,
the parameters c,γ,α are found by maximizing the likeli-
hood function, where the optimal values are projected to their
feasible sets whenever they are out of range.
5.4 Evaluation metrics
For a particular tweet, suppose that the prediction forR∞at time
tis denoted by ˆR∞(t). We use the following evaluation metrics in
our experiment:
•Absolute Percentage Error (APE):For a given tweetwand
a prediction time t, the APE metric is deﬁned as,
APE(w,t) = |ˆR∞(w,t) −R∞(w)|
R∞(w) .
When the APE metric is used for evaluation purposes, vari-
ous quantiles of APE over the tweets (all possible w) in the
test dataset will be reported at each time t.
•Kendall-τRank Correlation: This is a measure of rank cor-
relation [19], which computes the correlation between the
ranks of ˆR∞(t) and R∞for all test tweets. This metric is
generally more robust than Pearson’s correlation of values of
ˆR∞(t) and R∞. A high value of rank correlation means the
predicted and the ﬁnal retweet counts are strongly correlated.
•Breakout Tweet Coverage: We create a ground-truth list of
top-ktweets with the highest ﬁnal retweet count. We refer to
these tweets as “breakout” tweets. Using our model we can
also produce a top-klist based on the predicted ﬁnal retweet
count. We evaluate the methods by quantifying how well the
predicted top-k list covers the ground-truth top- k list. We
give additional details in Section 5.5.3.
5.5 Experimental results
In this section we evaluate the performance of S EISMIC and the
four competitors described in Section 5.3. All the methods start
making predictions as soon as a given tweet gets retweeted 50
times.
5.5.1 SEISMIC model validation
First, we empirically validate S EISMIC . In Proposition 4.1, we
obtain a formula for the expected number of ﬁnal retweets in terms
of the infectiousness parameter pt. Our goal here is to show that
Proposition 4.1 provides an unbiased estimate of the true ﬁnal retweet
count. We proceed as follows. We use S EISMIC to make a predic-
tion after observing each tweet for 1 hour and then plot the predic-
tion against the true ﬁnal number of retweets. If S EISMIC gives an
unbiased estimate, then we expect a diagonal curve y = x, that is,
the expected predicted ˆR∞matches the true expected R∞.
Figure 5 shows that the empirical average almost perfectly coin-
cides with S EISMIC ’s prediction. This suggests that the S EISMIC
estimator in Eq. (7) is unbiased and we can safely use it to predict
the expected ﬁnal number of retweets. However, as mentioned ear-
lier, in practice one often wants to shrink the prediction in order
to stabilize the estimator and achieve better overall performance.
Therefore, we use the calibrated prediction formula Eq. (8) for the
rest of the experiments.
5.5.2 Predicting ﬁnal retweet count
We run our S EISMIC method for each tweet and compute the
Absolute Percentage Error (APE) as a function of time. We plot
the quantiles of the distribution of APE of S EISMIC in Figure 6.
After observing the cascade for 10 minutes ( t=10 min), the 95th,
75th, and 50th percentiles of APE are less than 71% , 44%, and
25%, respectively. This means that after 10 minutes, average error
is less than 25% for 50% of the tweets and less than 71% for 95%
of the tweets. After 1 hour the error gets even lower—APE for
95%, 75% and 50% of the tweets drops to 62%, 30% and 15%,
respectively.
The proposed method, S EISMIC , demonstrates a clear improve-
ment over the baselines and the state-of-the-art as shown in Figures
7 and 8. The left panels of Figures 7 and 8 show the median APE of
different methods over time as more and more of the retweet cas-
cade gets revealed. The LR and LR-D baselines have very similar
performances, indicating the additional features used by LR-D are
not very informative. DPM performs poorly across the entire tweet
lifetime, while the other point process approach RPM is worse than
LR and LR-D in the early period but becomes better after about 2
hours. All in all, in terms of median APE score S EISMIC is about
0
250
500
750
1000
0 250 500 750 1000
SEISMIC prediction
Retweets
Identity
Mean
Figure 5: Predicted ﬁnal retweet counts nicely follow the
ground-truth retweet counts, which suggests SEISMIC provides
an unbiased estimate of the ﬁnal retweet count. The dashed red
curve is obtained by binning the tweets according to the pre-
diction and then computing the average number of retweets in
each bin.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Time (hour)
APE
Percentage
50%
80%
90%
Median
Distribution of APE for SEISMIC
Figure 6: Absolute Percentage Error (APE) of SEISMIC on the
test set. We plot the median and the middle 50th, 80th, 90th
percentiles of the distribution of APE across the tweets.
30% more accurate than all the competitors across the entire twee
lifetime.
Similarly, the right panels of Figures 7 and 8 show the Kendall-τ
rank correlation between the predicted ranking of top most retweeted
tweets and the ground-truth ranking of tweets. Again S EISMIC is
giving much more accurate rankings than other methods.
5.5.3 Identifying breakout tweets
Can we identify a breakout tweet before it receives most of its
retweets? This question arises from various applications like trend
forecasting or rumor detection. The goal of this prediction task is
to as early as possible identify “breakout” tweets, which have the
highest ﬁnal retweet count. We quantify the performances of dif-
ferent models in detecting breakout tweets by using models’ pre-
dictions of tweets’ ﬁnal retweet counts.
First, we form a ground-truth set L∗
M of size M. The set L∗
M
contains top-M tweets with the highest ﬁnal retweet counts. Then
with each of the prediction methods, we produce a sequence of size
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 2 4 6
Time (hour)
Median APE
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 2 4 6
Time (hour)
Rank Correlation
Method
SEISMIC
LR
LR−D
DPM
RPM
Figure 7: Median Absolute Percentage Error (APE) and
Kendall’s Rank Correlation of SEISMIC and the baselines as a
function of time. SEISMIC consistently gives best performance.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 20 40 60
Time (minute)
Median APE
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (minute)
Rank Correlation
Method
SEISMIC
LR
LR−D
DPM
RPM
Figure 8: Zoom-in of Figure 7: Median APE and Rank Corre-
lation for the ﬁrst 60 minutes after the tweet was posted. SEIS -
MIC performs especially well compared to the baselines early in
the tweet’s lifetime.
mlists, ˆLm(t). At each time tthe list ˆLm(t) contains the top-m
tweets with the highest predicted retweet counts at time t.
As described in Section 5.4, we then compare each ˆLm(t) with
L∗
M, and calculate the Breakout Tweet Coverage, which is deﬁned
as the proportion of tweets in L∗
M covered by ˆLm(t).
Fig. 9 shows the performance of S EISMIC in detecting top 100
most retweeted tweets ( L∗
100) as a function of time. S EISMIC is
able to cover 82 tweets in the ﬁrst 1 hour and 93 tweets in the ﬁrst
6 hours.
The ﬁfth most retweeted tweet in this plot is actually the tweet
we showed earlier in Figure 1. We observe that S EISMIC detects
this tweet 30 minutes after it has been posted, while LR and LR-D
both take more than an hour. DPM fails to detect this breakout for
the ﬁrst 6 hours (plots not show for brevity).
To compare S EISMIC with other methods, we keep the size of
the predicted lists to be m= 500, and use a larger target list L∗
500,
which is a more difﬁcult task than ﬁnding L∗
100. Figure 10 com-
pares the coverage of different methods against the proportion of
retweets seen. After seeing 20% of the retweets, S EISMIC covers
65% of the shortlist, while LR-D and LR both cover only 50%. In
1
20
40
60
80
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Time (hour)
Top Tweet
Miss   Detect
Coverage of the Top 100 Tweets by SEISMIC
Figure 9: Coverage of top 100 most retweeted tweets. Each row
represents a tweet. White blocks indicate that a given tweet
was not covered by SEISMIC ’s predicted list of top-500 tweets
at time t, and blue indicates successful coverage.
general, the dynamic Poisson model fails to provide accurate pre-
dictions and breakout identiﬁcations.
Overall, SEISMIC allows for effective detection of breakout tweets.
For instance, after seeing around 25% of the total number of retweets
of a given tweet (in other words, after observing a tweet for around
5 minutes), S EISMIC can identify 60% of the top-100 tweets ac-
cording to the ﬁnal retweet counts.
5.6 Discussion of model robustness
SEISMIC demonstrates better robustness than the other two point
process based methods — DPM and RPM. While S EISMIC is not
able to make a prediction for tweets that are in the supercritical
state, DPM and RPM are unable to make predictions when the de-
cay parameter is outside the feasible set ( γ < −1 for DPM and
γ <0 or α <0 for RPM). For example, in Figure 1, S EISMIC
characterizes the tweet as supercritical for the ﬁrst 70min, DPM
fails to make a prediction for the ﬁrst 6 hours and RPM is only able
to make a prediction from 30 to 80 minute.
All in all, we ﬁnd that tweets are in the supercritical regime for
only a very short time and S EISMIC is able to make predictions
for most of the tweets in most of the time. We ﬁnd that on av-
erage, S EISMIC is not able to make a prediction for 1.80% of the
tweets after observing them for 15 minutes. In other words, after
15 minutes, 1.80% of the tweets are still in the supercritical regime
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Fraction of observed retweets
Coverage
Method
SEISMIC
LR
LR−D
DPM
RPM
Comparison of the Coverage of Top 500 Tweets
Figure 10: Coverage of top 500 tweets ( L∗
500) by various meth-
ods. SEISMIC exhibits clear improvement over all methods after
about 10% of retweets are observed. All methods except DPM
achieve perfect coverage after 65% of retweets are observed.
(over all the tweets with at least 50 retweets). This number drops to
1.29% (0.67%) after 1 hour (6 hours). As a point of comparison we
also note that other methods are not able to make predictions for
a much larger fraction of tweets: DPM fails to make a prediction
for 6.77%, 5.79% and 1.45%, and RPM fails for 3.45%, 5.69% and
15.43% of the tweets after 15min, 1h, and 6h.
Our S EISMIC method is also signiﬁcantly faster than the RPM
model [28], which requires to solve a nonlinear optimization prob-
lem every time it predicts. In our implementation, the average run-
ning time per tweet for predicting at every 5 minutes for 6 hours
is 0.02s for SEISMIC and 3.6s for RPM. The reported running time
includes both parameter learning and prediction.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we propose SEISMIC , a ﬂexible framework for mod-
eling information cascades and predicting the ﬁnal size of an infor-
mation cascade. Our contributions are as follows:
•We model the information cascades as self-exciting point
processes on Galton-Watson trees. Our approach provides
a theoretical framework for explaining temporal patterns of
information cascades.
• SEISMIC is both scalable and accurate. The model requires
no feature engineering and scales linearly with the number
of observed reshares of a given post. This provides a way to
predict information spread for millions of posts in an online
real-time setting.
• SEISMIC brings extra ﬂexibility to estimation and prediction
tasks as it requires minimal knowledge about the information
cascade as well as the underlying network structure.
There are many interesting venues for future work and our pro-
posed model can be extended in many different directions. For
example, if the network structure is available, one could replace
the node degree ni by the number of newly exposed followers. If
content-based features or features of the original post are available,
one could develop a content-based prior ofpt for each post. If tem-
poral features such as the users’ time zone are available, one could
directly use them to modify the estimator ˆpt. In this sense, the
proposed model provides an extensible framework for predicting
information cascades.
SEISMIC is a statistically sound and scalable bottom-up model of
information cascades that allows for predicting ﬁnal cascade size as
the cascade unfolds over the network. We hope that our framework
will prove useful for developing richer understanding of cascading
behaviors in online networks, paving ways towards better manage-
ment of shared content.
Data and Software
The S EISMIC software and the dataset we use in Section 5 can
be found in http://snap.stanford.edu/seismic/. The
R package of our algorithm is also available on http://cran.
r-project.org/web/packages/seismic.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank David O. Siegmund for his con-
structive suggestions and Austin Benson, Bhaswar B. Bhattacharya,
Joshua Loftus for their helpful comments. This research has been
supported in part by NSF IIS-1016909, CNS-1010921, IIS-1149837,
IIS-1159679, ARO MURI, DARPA SMISC, DARPA SIMPLEX,
Stanford Data Science Initiative, Boeing, Facebook, V olkswagen,
and Yahoo.
7. REFERENCES
[1] https://twitter.com/mottbollomy/status/
127001313513967616.
[2] D. Agarwal, B.-C. Chen, and P. Elango. Spatio-temporal
models for estimating click-through rate. In WWW ’09, 2009.
[3] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts.
Everyone’s an inﬂuencer: quantifying inﬂuence on twitter. In
WSDM ’11, 2011.
[4] R. Bandari, S. Asur, and B. A. Huberman. The pulse of news
in social media: Forecasting popularity. In ICWSM ’12,
pages 26–33, 2012.
[5] A.-L. Barabasi. The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human
dynamics. Nature, 435:207, 2005.
[6] J. Cheng, L. Adamic, P. A. Dow, J. M. Kleinberg, and
J. Leskovec. Can cascades be predicted? In WWW ’14, 2014.
[7] R. Crane and D. Sornette. Robust dynamic classes revealed
by measuring the response function of a social system.
PNAS, 105(41), 2008.
[8] H. Daneshmand, M. Gomez-Rodriguez, L. Song, and
B. Schölkopf. Estimating diffusion network structures:
Recovery conditions, sample complexity & soft-thresholding
algorithm. In ICML ’14, 2014.
[9] P. A. Dow, L. A. Adamic, and A. Friggeri. The anatomy of
large facebook cascades. In ICWSM ’13, 2013.
[10] N. Du, L. Song, M. Yuan, and A. J. Smola. Learning
networks of heterogeneous inﬂuence. In NIPS ’12, 2012.
[11] R. Durrett. Probability: theory and examples. Cambridge
university press, 2010.
[12] S. Gao, J. Ma, and Z. Chen. Modeling and predicting
retweeting dynamics on microblogging platforms. In WSDM
’15, 2015.
[13] M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Leskovec, D. Balduzzi, and
B. Schölkopf. Uncovering the structure and temporal
dynamics of information propagation. Network Science,
2:26–65, 4 2014.
[14] M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Leskovec, and B. Schölkopf.
Modeling information propagation with survival theory. In
ICML ’13, 2013.
[15] M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Leskovec, and B. Schölkopf.
Structure and Dynamics of Information Pathways in On-line
Media. In WSDM ’13, 2013.
[16] A. G. Hawkes. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually
exciting point processes. Biometrika, 58(1), 1971.
[17] L. Hong, O. Dan, and B. D. Davison. Predicting popular
messages in twitter. In WWW ’11, 2011.
[18] D. Hunter, P. Smyth, D. Q. Vu, and A. U. Asuncion.
Dynamic egocentric models for citation networks. In ICML
’11, 2011.
[19] M. G. Kendall. A new measure of rank correlation.
Biometrika, pages 81–93, 1938.
[20] A. Kupavskii, L. Ostroumova, A. Umnov, S. Usachev,
P. Serdyukov, G. Gusev, and A. Kustarev. Prediction of
retweet cascade size over time. In CIKM ’12, 2012.
[21] D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. Tracing the ﬂow of
information on a global scale using Internet chain-letter data.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(12):4633–4638, 2008.
[22] Y . Matsubara, Y . Sakurai, B. A. Prakash, L. Li, and
C. Faloutsos. Rise and fall patterns of information diffusion:
Model and implications. In KDD ’12, 2012.
[23] G. O. Mohler, M. B. Short, P. J. Brantingham, F. P.
Schoenberg, and G. E. Tita. Self-exciting point process
modeling of crime. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 106(493):100–108, 2011.
[24] N. Naveed, T. Gottron, J. Kunegis, and A. C. Alhadi. Bad
news travel fast: A content-based analysis of interestingness
on twitter. In ACM WebSci ’11, 2011.
[25] Y . Ogata. Statistical models for earthquake occurrences and
residual analysis for point processes. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 83, 1988.
[26] S. Petrovic, M. Osborne, and V . Lavrenko. RT to Win!
Predicting Message Propagation in Twitter. InICWSM ’11,
2011.
[27] E. M. Rogers. Diffusion of innovations. Simon and Schuster,
2010.
[28] H.-W. Shen, D. Wang, C. Song, and A.-L. Barabási.
Modeling and predicting popularity dynamics via reinforced
poisson processes. arXiv:1401.0778, 2014.
[29] D. L. Snyder and M. I. Miller. Random Point Processes in
Time and Space. Springer, 2011.
[30] B. Suh, L. Hong, P. Pirolli, and E. H. Chi. Want to be
retweeted? large scale analytics on factors impacting retweet
in twitter network. In SOCIALCOM ’10, 2010.
[31] G. Szabo and B. A. Huberman. Predicting the popularity of
online content. Communications of the ACM, 53(8):80–88,
Aug. 2010.
[32] J. Yang and J. Leskovec. Patterns of temporal variation in
online media. In WSDM ’11, 2011.
[33] S.-H. Yang and H. Zha. Mixture of mutually exciting
processes for viral diffusion. In ICML ’13, 2013.
[34] T. Zaman, E. Fox, and E. Bradlow. A Bayesian approach for
predicting the popularity of tweets. Annals of Applied
Statistics, 8(3):1583–1611, 2014.
[35] T. R. Zaman, R. Herbrich, J. Van Gael, and D. Stern.
Predicting information spreading in twitter. In
Computational Social Science and the Wisdom of Crowds
Workshop, NIPS, 2010.
[36] K. Zhou, H. Zha, and L. Song. Learning social infectivity in
sparse low-rank networks using multi-dimensional hawkes
processes. In AISTATS ’13, 2013.